JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill is away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton
go head to
head for the last time before
Election Day
-- what to watch for in the
final debate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Wednesday:
Ecuador's government cuts off
Internet access
for Julian Assange after the
WikiLeaks founder
released another batch of
e-mails from the
Clinton campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how
experimental agriculture
methods are helping farmers keep
water and
fertilizer on their crops and
away from rivers
they could be polluting.
ANTHONY SEIM, Farmer: I don't
think there's
any farmer that wakes up in the
morning and
says, I'm just going to go dump
1,000 gallons
of fertilizer down a ditch.
Everybody's trying.
It's just that it doesn't always
work.
There's a lot of things that we
can't control.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Once more,
with hard feelings.
Tonight's presidential debate is
a climactic
moment in a bitter contest
headlined by talk
of sexual misdeeds and e-mail
malfeasance.
John Yang begins our coverage
from Las Vegas.
JOHN YANG: The final face-off
comes as Donald
Trump is facing sliding poll
numbers, allegations
of sexual assaults and is
pressing his own
claims about rigged elections.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
He sort of telegraphed a little
bit it's going
to be scorched earth.
JOHN YANG: Campaigning in Ohio
today, Hillary
Clinton's running mate, Tim
Kaine, predicted
his nominee won't be rattled.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Hillary is going to
be very strong,
very strong on facts and the
details and demonstrating
knowledge.
And I think she will be what she
was in the
first two debates.
She will be steady and calm,
whatever Donald
Trump tries to throw at her.
JOHN YANG: One thing Donald
Trump could throw,
a new allegation against former
President
Bill Clinton.
Breitbart News reported today
that Leslie
Millwee, a former Arkansas TV
reporter, claims
that then-Governor Clinton
sexually assaulted
her three times in 1980.
Trump campaign chairman Steve
Bannon is on
leave as Breitbart News
executive chairman.
Trump's number two, Mike Pence,
didn't mention
the report today, but in
Durango, Colorado,
he argued that his man is set to
deliver a
strong performance.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
You sure saw that on the stage
in his last
debate a week ago Sunday, didn't
you, when
he beat Hillary Clinton hands
down.
And I promise you, I'm going to
get on an
airplane.
I'm headed to Vegas, because
you're going
to see it happen again tonight.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Chris Wallace of FOX
News will
moderate the 90-minute debate on
six topics
in 15-minute segments: debt and
entitlements,
immigration, the economy, the
Supreme Court,
foreign hot spots, and fitness
to be president.
And on the sidelines,
psychological warfare.
The Trump campaign has invited
Malik Obama,
President Obama's Kenyan-born
half-brother,
but denies it's trying to
resurrect claims
that the president was born in
Kenya.
Another Trump guest, Patricia
Smith, the mother
of a State Department employee
killed in the
attack on the diplomatic
compound in Benghazi,
Libya.
The Clinton camp has invited two
business
figures highly critical of
Trump, former Hewlett-Packard
CEO Meg Whitman and billionaire
Mark Cuban.
Traditionally, these third and
last two debates
have featured the candidates
sitting at a
table together for a sort of
more intimate
setting, but tonight a change.
The two candidates will be at
lecterns for
a more formal setting.
It's not clear who asked for it,
but both
campaigns agreed to the change.
And you want to know about those
hard feelings.
Don't expect a handshake tonight
when the
two families are introduced into
the hall
-- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: John, what
about the preparations?
How did the candidates prepare
today?
JOHN YANG: Well, Hillary Clinton
has been
true to form, the same way she
has prepared
the last two days -- last two
debates, rather.
She flew in last night.
She's at the Four Seasons Hotel
here in Las
Vegas doing several hours of
debate prep on
debate day, getting those
last-minute debate
preps in.
Her entire debate team flew out
with her,
including Philippe Reines, who
has been standing
in for Donald Trump.
Donald Trump, on the other hand,
is a little
bit of change.
He has acquiesced to advisers
who wanted a
little more serious and more
formal debate
prep, but still no mock debates.
This morning, Kellyanne Conway,
the campaign
manager, was asked what her
advice would be
to her candidate.
She said one word: focus.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Nevadans are
used to fight
night.
They are used to the Mayweather
battle, the
showdowns and so forth.
And you have been reporting from
there.
Are the people in the state
cognizant of how
important their state could be
in the grand
scheme of things?
JOHN YANG: I think they are.
They understand that this is a
state that
has voted for the winner in the
election,
the winner of the White House in
every campaign
except one since 1908.
There is a great deal of
excitement.
You talk about the heavyweight
prize fights,
the stunts like Evel Knievel
jumping over
the fountain at Caesars Palace.
A lot of people are going to be
watching here
tonight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
John Yang, reporting
from Nevada, we will check in
with you later
tonight.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: A
top Iraqi commander called for
the surrender
of Mosul on day three of the
offensive to
retake the city.
The general estimated up to
6,000 Islamic
State fighters remain in Mosul,
putting up
fierce resistance.
Coalition airstrikes blasted
ISIS positions
today, as Iraqi and Kurdish
ground forces
kept pushing closer.
LT.
GEN.
TALIB SHAGHATI, Iraqi Commander
(through translator):
From this place, I appeal to all
local fighters
with the Islamic State group to
lay down their
weapons in order not risk their
lives, so
they can return to their
families and their
city.
Our forces are advancing and
have surrounded
the city.
The liberation of Mosul will be
swift.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
humanitarian
group Save the Children reported
that at least
5,000 people have fled the Mosul
area in the
last 10 days.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A man dressed
in an Afghan
army uniform killed two
Americans in Kabul
today, one military, one
civilian.
Three other Americans were
wounded.
The attacker was killed later.
NATO said the U.S. victims were
involved in
training and advising Afghan
security forces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Syria,
relative quiet reigned
in Eastern Aleppo for a second
day, as Russian
and Syrian forces made ready to
let rebels
and civilians leave the city
tomorrow.
The United Nations likened the
plan to forced
displacement.
Russia said tomorrow's planned
cease-fire
will now last 11 hours, instead
of eight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A protest
outside the U.S.
Embassy in the Philippines
erupted into violence
today.
About 1,000 activists called for
an end to
military cooperation with the
U.S. Street
battles with police broke out,
and a police
truck drove into the crowds
repeatedly.
At least 10 people were injured.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It took 16 years
of negotiating,
but the U.N. Children's Fund has
reached a
deal to cut the price of a
crucial childhood
vaccine in half.
One shot protects against
diphtheria, tetanus,
pertussis, hepatitis B, and a
type of influenza.
UNICEF plans to send 450 million
doses to
80 countries by 2020.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, professors
from 14 Pennsylvania state
colleges went on
strike today, affecting more
than 100,000
students.
It stems from a contract dispute
over benefits
and wages.
Some of the state's largest
schools, including
Penn State and the University of
Pittsburgh,
are not affected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a relatively
quiet day
on Wall Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 40
points to close at 18202.
The Nasdaq rose two, and the S&P
500 added
four.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
why Ecuador cut off Julian
Assange's Internet;
undercover videos that claim
Democrats are
rigging the election put in
context; a look
ahead to tonight's final
presidential debate;
and much more.
For the last four years, Julian
Assange, the
founder of WikiLeaks, the
anti-secrecy group,
has been staying in self-imposed
exile in
the Ecuadorian Embassy in
London.
He's taking refuge from a sexual
assault investigation
in Sweden that Assange claims is
an American
plot to have him extradited.
Over the summer, WikiLeaks began
divulging
thousands of pages of documents
and e-mails
stolen from the Democratic
National Committee,
and, most recently, Hillary
Clinton's campaign
chairman, all in an effort, said
Assange himself,
to damage her presidential
candidacy.
Now a new twist in this saga.
In a statement issued yesterday,
Ecuador said
it had cut off Assange's
Internet access,
saying in part: "The government
of Ecuador
respects the principle of
nonintervention
in the internal affairs of other
states.
It doesn't interfere in external
electoral
processes, nor does it favor any
particular
candidate."
For more on this, I'm joined now
from London
by Raphael Satter of the
Associated Press.
He's covered WikiLeaks
extensively.
Is there anything more to it
than that statement
by the Ecuadorian government?
RAPHAEL SATTER, Associated
Press: You know,
it's not much more -- not much
more official.
There is an enormous amount of
speculation
about what's going on behind the
scenes.
WikiLeaks alleges that, despite
what the Ecuadorian
government has said, they are,
in fact, bound
to pressure from the U.S. State
Department,
and, in particular, John Kerry,
the secretary
of state.
Now, the State Department has
denied all this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The batches of
e-mails have
been trickling out for months,
Hillary Clinton's
e-mails, John Podesta's e-mails
for weeks
now.
So, why now?
Why intervene now to try to cut
off his Internet
access?
RAPHAEL SATTER: It's quite
puzzling, actually.
The timing is a bit of a
mystery.
And the best people to speak
about this are
the parties concerned
themselves.
But neither WikiLeaks nor the
Ecuadorian -- nor
various Ecuadorian officials
that we have
tried have returned our calls or
even deigned
to comment.
They have communicated via
Twitter or through
their Web sites in a series of
terse statements,
which leave a lot to the
imagination, frankly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this a sign
that perhaps
Julian Assange is overstaying
his welcome?
RAPHAEL SATTER: I think that
people have speculated
about how long Julian could stay
at the Ecuadorian
Embassy in London ever since he
came in there.
The Ecuadorians have themselves
said that
Assange is still welcome to stay
as long as
the reasons that he sought
asylum remain the
same.
So, there -- it doesn't seem
like he is going
to get thrown out any time soon.
That said, there have been
rumors of tension
between Assange and his hosts,
and conceivably
this could be a sign of that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
Ecuadorians must recognize
that cutting off Internet access
to Julian
Assange doesn't mean that they
shut down WikiLeaks.
RAPHAEL SATTER: I think they do
realize that.
And they were at pains to point
that out in
their statement.
They said that they don't intend
to interfere
with WikiLeaks' journalistic
activities.
And for it's worth, WikiLeaks
has continued
to publish, in fact, public
quite aggressively.
So, it seems that, for the
moment at least,
this Internet ban has not hurt
WikiLeaks'
ability to publish documents.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And still
there's no word
on whether or not Julian Assange
could borrow
someone's laptop to try to get
instructions
across or give instructions over
a telephone?
RAPHAEL SATTER: There are really
a lot of
unanswered questions here.
The Ecuadorians were rather
vague in their
statements.
They said that they were
restricting his Internet
access.
That could conceivably mean a
lot of things.
That could mean that he can use
the Internet
for some things and not for
others, or it
could mean that he's been kicked
off the Internet
altogether.
It's not clear, and no one's
answered our
questions, whether Julian
Assange can make
phone calls, whether he can send
text messages,
whether he can send courier
messages back
and forth.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He has a
fairly -- or had
a fairly robust infrastructure.
He was able to take part in
interviews around
the world, including on this
program a couple
of months ago.
RAPHAEL SATTER: Yes.
I don't think there is any
reason to believe
that infrastructure has gone.
The Ecuadorian Embassy is not a
very large
space.
It's a rather modest suite on
roughly the
ground floor of a red brick
building on Hans
Crescent, which is near the
Harrods department
store.
There's not a huge amount of
space, but it's
enough to do TV interviews, to
have journalists
over every once in a while and
even host celebrity
guests.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Raphael Satter
from the Associated Press,
joining us from
London tonight, thanks so much.
RAPHAEL SATTER: Thanks for
having me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: WikiLeaks is
not the only
online organization making
political news.
Lisa Desjardins takes a closer
look at a new
release that also targets
Democrats.
LISA DESJARDINS: The videos are
from a conservative
group famous and infamous for
undercover work.
More on them in a minute.
But let's start with the
content.
There are two videos and two
allegations against
Democrats.
The first, that operatives for
the left, especially
this man, Scott Foval, have sent
people to
Trump rallies to incite
violence.
To an undercover operative,
Foval says there
is a script.
SCOTT FOVAL, Americans United
for Change:
It's a matter of showing up, to
want to get
into the rally in a Planned
Parenthood T-shirt
or Trump is a Nazi.
You can message to draw them out
and draw
them to punch you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Foval is a
Democratic consultant
who recently worked with a group
called Mobilize
hired by the Democratic Party in
June.
It's not clear when the video
was recorded,
but Foval says he works directly
with the
party and the Clinton campaign.
SCOTT FOVAL: I answer to the
head of special
events for the DNC and the head
of special
events and political for the
campaign.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Democratic
National Committee
flatly says Foval was a
subcontractor and
denies supporting anything like
what Foval
described.
But what do we know from actual
events on
the campaign trail?
Remember this, the clash of
protesters, supporters
and police in March in Chicago?
It led to Donald Trump canceling
a rally.
On the tape, another Democratic
operative
brings it up.
MAN: So, the Chicago protest
when they shut
all that, that was us.
None of this is supposed to come
back to us,
because we want it coming from
people.
We don't want it to come from
the party.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's the
first charge.
And before we go to the second,
a quick word
about who's behind these videos.
His name is James O'Keefe, a
conservative
whose group, Project Veritas
Action, investigates
left-leaning entities.
He's been arrested and pled
guilty for some
undercover tactics in the past.
O'Keefe insists his work is
accurate, including
the second charge in these
videos about voter
fraud.
Scott Foval seems to talk openly
about bringing
in people from one state to vote
in another.
He mentions creating paychecks
and finding
cars with in-state license
plates.
SCOTT FOVAL: You use shells, use
shell companies.
The cars come from one copy.
The paychecks come from another.
LISA DESJARDINS: At one point,
he stresses
the need to avoid prosecution.
But that's not what his boss
says.
Bob Creamer heads up Mobilize,
and contracted
directly for the Democratic
Party.
In the video, he pushes back at
an idea to
affect voting.
BOB CREAMER, Mobilize: I'm going
to run this
by our lawyers.
My fear is that someone would
decide that
this was a big voter fraud
scheme.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, the head
of the Democratic
Party released a statement,
saying: "We do
not believe, nor do we have any
evidence to
suggest that the activities
alleged occurred."
The Clinton campaign also gave
us a statement,
saying that those behind the
video are known
to be misleading, but that the
campaign disavows
the ideas and tactics in the
video, calling
them troubling, even as a
theory.
One problem here is, we do not
have the raw
footage from these tapes.
We do not have the context for
many of these
words.
We do know this.
Scott Foval has been fired from
his job.
And his boss, Bob Creamer, has
ended his work
on the election this year,
saying he doesn't
want to be a distraction.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we turn now
to preview
tonight's debate with
representatives from
both campaigns.
We start with Donald Trump
supporter Dr. Ben
Carson.
I spoke with him a short time
ago, and began
by asking what Donald Trump
needs to do tonight
in face of declining polls,
including in key
battleground states.
DR.
BEN CARSON, Conservative
Activist: I hope
he's going to spend a lot of
time talking
about the issues that really
concern the American
people, the economy, jobs,
education, immigration,
our standing in the world and
how we relate
to the various problems that are
going on
in the world.
And then I hope he will probably
also highlight
some of the things that have
come out, you
know, in recent weeks about
Hillary Clinton
that many in the news have not
bothered to
report on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you referring
to the WikiLeaks
stories?
DR.
BEN CARSON: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what
specifically?
DR.
BEN CARSON: Well, I don't think
there's been
a lot of emphasis on, you know,
the fact that
she and her staff have kind of
savaged, you
know, Bernie Sanders, have
talked about Catholics
and evangelicals in a way
perhaps not becoming
to the leadership of this
country, where we're
supposed to have freedom of
speech, freedom
of religion and freedom of
expression.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're told
that Donald
Trump is inviting several guests
to the debate
tonight, including the mother of
a State Department
contractor who died at Benghazi,
Libya, and
also a woman who for the first
time is going
public accusing former President
Bill Clinton
of sexually assaulting her in
Arkansas in
1980.
Is this where you think the
focus should be
tonight?
DR.
BEN CARSON: I would love to see
that kind
of stuff put off to the side.
That's why we have a legal
system, so that
those kind of things could be
redressed.
And it goes for both sides.
So, I would much prefer to see a
talk on the
issues, because the issues are
gigantic, and
the solutions are incredibly
divergent.
And yet I doubt that the average
person on
the street could tell you the
difference between
the two, because we just haven't
heard the
discussion.
We just hear about all these
other things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, did you
urge Donald Trump
not to invite these individuals?
We know he's also invited the
family members
of individuals who were killed
by undocumented
immigrants.
He's invited the half-brother of
President
Obama, who is supporting Donald
Trump.
DR.
BEN CARSON: I didn't have
anything to do with
who's invited and who's not
invited.
But we certainly have talked
about the issues.
And I think that's really what
the American
people deserve to hear about,
you know, particularly
when we're talking about the
future.
We're talking about our children
and our grandchildren.
We need to be talking about
their financial
foundation, and we need to be
talking about
safety for them.
And we need to be talking about
ways that
we can decrease the tension in
our society,
because a house divided against
itself cannot
stand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know one
of the things
Donald Trump has been talking
about repeatedly
on the campaign trail lately is
that this
election, he says, will be
rigged.
He's talking about rampant voter
fraud.
Do you expect that to happen?
DR.
BEN CARSON: Well, I do know of
many instances
where things have not been good,
and not just
recently, but this is going back
for quite
a period of time.
And it's always baffled me why
we don't try
to fix it.
You know, for instance, when it
comes to the
ballots, it's such an easy thing
to just photograph
a ballot as a person comes in,
so that you
have a backup system, so that if
something
comes out, and it's variant to
what you thought
it should be, you have a way of
checking it.
These are easy things to remedy
if we really
want to do it.
For some reason, we don't want
to do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, one of the
reasons I'm
asking is because his campaign
manager, Kellyanne
Conway, said this morning in an
interview
on CNN that she doesn't think
that there is
going to be widespread voter
fraud.
So, which is right?
DR.
BEN CARSON: Well, it really
doesn't matter
what anybody thinks.
What does matter is that we
decide that we're
going to fix it.
We can send a man to the moon,
but we can't
verify something as simple as an
election?
Of course we could do it, if we
had the will
to do it.
So that, to me, makes a lot more
sense than
any of the arguments on one side
or the other
side.
Just fix it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Carson, we
heard Donald
Trump say in a speech just in
the last few
days that if he doesn't win this
election,
that the United States loses its
independence.
He talked about dire
circumstances if he doesn't
win.
Is that how you see what's at
stake here?
DR.
BEN CARSON: Well, I have heard
both sides,
you know, make that claim.
And, you know, certainly they're
entitled
to their opinion.
I'm hopeful that the American
people are wise
enough to guide us through the
difficult times
that lay ahead for us.
We're going to have difficult
times either
way because of the amount of
debt that we
have incurred, because of the
radical Islamic
terrorists who want to destroy
us.
There are a lot of problems that
aren't going
to go away regardless of who's
elected that
we are going to have to deal
with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Ben Carson,
joining us
from Las Vegas at the debate
site, we thank
you.
DR.
BEN CARSON: Wonderful to be with
you.
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to Robby Mook.
He's the campaign manager for
Hillary Clinton.
And welcome to the program.
Again, Robby Mook, first of all,
we know Hillary
Clinton is doing well in the
polls, so what
does she need to do tonight?
Can she just sort of rest on her
laurels and
sit back and not take any
chances?
ROBBY MOOK, Hillary Clinton
Campaign Manager:
Well, not at all, Judy.
First of all, our campaign
doesn't take anything
for granted.
We run like we're 20 points
behind no matter
what.
But, more importantly, this
debate is a terrific
opportunity for Hillary to speak
directly
to the American people in an
unfiltered way
about the real plans that she
has to make
a difference in their lives.
This election is supposed to be
about the
American people, supposed to be
about their
future.
And the candidates are supposed
to be on that
stage proving that they can
actually make
a difference and actually
improve people's
lives.
And so that's what we hope that
this debate
is about.
Hillary's come prepared to the
last two debates.
She's going to come prepared to
this debate
to have a substantive discussion
of those
issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We know, Robby
Mook, that Donald
Trump has invited a number of
individuals
to be his guests tonight,
including a woman
who is coming forward the first
time to charge
that Bill Clinton sexually
assaulted her in
1980.
He's invited the mother of the
man, the State
Department contractor who died
at Benghazi.
How will she handle this if it
comes up in
the debate?
ROBBY MOOK: Well, first of all,
Judy, as I
said, Hillary's come to these
debates consistently
prepared to talk about the
issues.
Donald Trump has not.
We saw him pull a media stunt
before the last
debate.
He's clearly trying to use the
tickets he's
given to invite special guests
to pull more
stunts.
And we're just not going to get
into that
and Hillary's not going to get
into that.
I think the American people
deserve to hear
substantive answers to real
questions about
real policies, real solutions,
and what these
people are really going to do if
they get
the job as president.
So, she's not going to get
thrown off her
game.
And Donald Trump gets to run the
campaign
that he wants to run.
That's his right.
Hillary is going to focus on
what matters
to voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, in
connection with that,
the Trump campaign has been
talking a lot,
Donald Trump himself has been
bringing up
this -- the FBI report that came
out in the
last few days that shows that
there was a
conversation between the State
Department
and the FBI about whether to
lower the classification
of one of Secretary Clinton's
e-mails in exchange
for providing more FBI -- giving
FBI employees
the chance to hold more jobs
overseas, a potential
quid pro quo.
If that comes up, is she going
to have an
answer to that?
ROBBY MOOK: Well, I think she is
going to
have an answer about what her
policies would
be as president on this issue.
I think, first and foremost,
this is an interagency
dispute or interagency
conversation that was
going on.
The State Department has denied
there was
any sort of quid pro quo.
So has the FBI.
So has the White House.
They have said this is just not
true.
And, again, it's very
commonplace for agencies
to have disagreements over
classifications.
That's what was happening here.
And I'm going to leave it to
those departments
to talk about that.
And, obviously, as president,
Hillary would
have a role in determining how
things are
classified.
And if she's asked about that,
she will be
ready to answer that question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Something else
that's come
up in the last day or so, Robby
Mook, are
these videotapes prepared by
James O'Keefe.
Our reporter Lisa Desjardins
just did a report
a few minutes ago on the program
about them.
We know some individuals have
been fired from
their jobs as a result.
Essentially, it had to do with
working to
rig elections, rig voter
turnout, and also
arrange to disrupt Donald
Trump's rallies.
How is your camp -- how do you
see this evidence
that clearly something was
either done or
was at least talked about during
this campaign
cycle?
ROBBY MOOK: Well, the person in
question is
a long discredited conservative
activist who
claims to be a journalist.
Look, what's really
disappointing here, Judy,
is that Donald Trump is losing
this race,
and he is trying to blame
everyone else except
himself for his loss.
And so he's setting up a
situation in which
he can claim that the election
was rigged
and that people didn't actually
vote against
him.
The fact is, the longer this
election goes
on, the more that people hear
from Donald
Trump, the more of the racism,
the bigotry,
the disrespect towards women,
the more they
learn about his past, the way
he's treated
women, the more that people are
leaving him.
The fact of the matter that he's
struggling
to win the state of Utah right
now really
says all that we need to know.
This election is not going to be
rigged.
Republican secretaries of state
are the ones
running this election, by and
large.
Republican secretaries of state
are the ones
coming out saying, this is not
rigged, asking
Donald Trump to stop speaking
this way.
The fact of the matter is also
that we're
seeing higher voter turnout than
we saw in
the 2012 cycle, particularly
when we look
at vote by mail in states like
Florida, North
Carolina.
We think this is going to be the
biggest election
in our history.
We think more people are going
to vote than
ever before.
We just heard that the voter
rolls passed
200 million people in this
country.
That would be historic, if
that's the case.
I think Donald Trump should
worry more about
trying to win people's votes and
let the voters
go to the polls and make their
voice heard
in this historic, high-turnout
election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, we are
hearing from
Trump supporters that they
expect him to bring
up again something he did raise
in the first
debate.
And that is, Hillary Clinton has
been in the
public arena for 30 years, and
yet, his words,
taxes are up, terrorism has
spread, jobs have
vanished, and so on.
What is her answer to that
question?
ROBBY MOOK: You know, I hope
that Hillary
gets a chance to talk about her
record and
her history on that debate
stage, because
I don't -- I would put her
record of accomplishment
up against anyone's, and in
particular Donald
Trump.
Hillary Clinton has spent three
decades fighting
for kids and families ever since
she left
law school and went to work for
the Children's
Defense Fund.
She fought to get health
insurance for every
American.
When she lost that fight, she
kept working
with Republicans and Democrats
until she got
the Children's Health Insurance
Program, which
covers eight million children in
this country.
She negotiated a historic
reduction in nuclear
weapons with Russia.
If we look at Donald Trump's
record, this
is a man who was sued repeatedly
for racial
housing discrimination.
He has a record of not paying
his contractors,
not paying low-wage workers.
And then we just saw over the
last two weeks
women speaking out that they
were demeaned
and disrespected.
If Donald Trump wants to have a
conversation
about the history of these
candidates and
who's been fighting for working
people, who's
been fighting for the rights of
women, we
welcome that discussion.
Hillary Clinton is going to win
that hands
down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will
find out in about
two-and-a-half-hours.
Robby Mook, who is the campaign
manager for
Hillary Clinton, thank you,
Robby.
ROBBY MOOK: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for more on
tonight's debate,
we are joined by our debate
night team, syndicated
columnist Mark Shields, David
Brooks, columnist
for The New York Times, and Amy
Walter of
The Cook Political Report.
And we will show you when we say
your name.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Looking better
already.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of you are
looking really
good.
So, Mark, given this atmosphere,
what do you
expect tonight?
MARK SHIELDS: It amazes me.
I mean, just to review the
bidding, Donald
Trump won 41 contests.
He won every big state, save
that of John
Kasich's and Ted Cruz's home
states.
I mean, he was -- outpolled
nearest rival
by 2-1, as the
anti-establishment candidate,
the candidate of change, the
candidate of
the forgotten Americans, the
overlooked Americans,
taking on the established wisdom
of the conservative
hegemony in this country.
And he has dropped it.
He dropped it all.
And he's just been in the weeds
and just on
terrible stuff.
There's been nothing -- he's
allowed himself
to become the issue in the
campaign, instead
of making change and his
opponent, who says
he's been in the arena for 30
years.
So, I don't know what to expect,
in answer
to your question.
To me, it's pretty -- Ben Carson
said it well.
The election is about the
voters.
And, if anything, the Trump
campaign has not
made it about the voters over
the last two
weeks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, is
there an undecided
voter left that these folks are
going to go
out and make this case?
This is their -- this is one of
the largest
stages that they have all
season, all year
long.
Right?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
If there are any undecided,
they're not bright
enough to find the remote
control, so they
are not going to watch the
debate, because
they can't find it.
No, there may be some.
And, actually, the one thing, as
Trump has
made himself the subject of this
campaign,
unlike the primary season, the
polls have
moved.
And so that means, whether
they're decided
or undecided, there are people
who are willing
to be driven away by him.
And that's because they think, I
will vote
for the guy because he's a
change agent, but
I think he's kind of a jerk.
But as the jerk factor rises,
those votes
do shift.
I'm sort of more concerned this
debate less
about the two candidates than
just about the
whole country.
The campaign has been so
degrading, and so
many people around the country
are just in
such poor spirits.
It's as if we suffered a
revaluation or a
re-norming of what's acceptable.
And I hope -- at the same time
our standards
are being degraded by this
campaign, some
people are reacting the other
way and saying
it's time to reestablish some
sense of decency.
And I'm just hoping the debate
doesn't degrade
us any further, not as much of
who helps,
who goes up a point or two in
the polls.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Given all that,
Amy, what does
Hillary Clinton need to do
tonight?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
I completely concur with what
David said.
And I think that's exactly where
she needs
to go.
The very first debate, her goal
was to sort
of get underneath Trump's skin,
make the focus
about him.
And he played the part
brilliantly.
Right?
He took the bait.
He went into these rabbit holes.
He completely exploded, then, of
course, the
next day, continued to unravel
with the tweets
against the Miss Universe.
The second debate was really --
for her was
just holding strong in the face
of a very
aggressive Donald Trump, in the
face of the
press conference that came
before him featuring
the women who had made
allegations against
her husband.
This is the chance she has to
close this campaign
with a positive message and a
positive vision
for the country, to give people
a reason to
vote for her, not just to vote
against Donald
Trump.
And she's going to come under
fire.
There is no doubt that Donald
Trump is going
to once again make an aggressive
push to put
her on the defensive.
She's going to have to answer
that.
But I think, to close the deal
here, she needs
to make people feel comfortable
with her as
president and comfortable with
how she's going
to bring this country back from
what has been
an incredibly divisive campaign.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark Shields,
is there any
incentive that either of these
candidates
have to take the high road?
Because it seems that, with
social media,
with these sort of on-stage
moments, they're
rewarded for going lower and
lower.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I think there
is.
And I think it is because the
proximity closest
to Election Day.
If I were Hillary Clinton
tonight, I would
say, if in fact I do lose, I
hope that I will
have the grace and decency and
the sense of
patriotism that the man said
eight years ago
when he lost, and he said, I had
the honor
-- this is a quote -- of calling
Senator Barack
Obama to congratulate him on
being elected
the next president of the
country we both
love.
I wish tonight Godspeed to the
man who was
my former opponent and will be
my president.
That sounds -- it sounds almost
biblical,
Shakespearian in its eloquence.
That was John McCain in 2008.
I think, if Hillary Clinton is
capable of
doing that tonight, I mean, of
sort of taking
it, reminding us of what we have
done and
what we have been able to do,
after really
heated, heated campaigns.
I agree with David and Amy.
It would be great to have better
politics.
When we get a report like
Lisa's, that's evocative
of 1972 and dirty tricks.
That's what it is.
It's trying to -- if in fact
it's valid, it's
to provoke a reaction and to
start a political
strife-fest.
DAVID BROOKS: It should be said
Hillary taking
the high road, there are two
problems with
that.
One is, to her, the high road
has always been
just a laundry list of programs.
There hasn't actually been a
vision or even
something personal and
emotional.
It hasn't been that high.
It's been prosaic.
The second thing is -- and we're
reminded
of that in Lisa's report -- is
that we have
taken Barack Obama's non-scandal
administration
for granted.
And that has never been the
nature of Hillary
Clinton's campaign or life, at
least for the
past 30 years.
There's always been a wave of
scandal, and
sometimes involving her, but
often involving
people around her.
And for some reason -- and,
again, we don't
know the complete substance of
these allegations,
but that kind of behavior is the
low-rent
sort of behavior that sometimes,
you know,
wouldn't be strange -- well,
it's even an
insult to Dick Morris, who she
brought back
into the White House.
But that has been...
MARK SHIELDS: She brought him
twice.
DAVID BROOKS: Twice.
And so that's just been part of
her group.
And so that's -- the moral
injury in this
campaign is not all on one side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Amy, that's
something
that she's gotten accustomed to
having to
talk about, isn't it?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, and that's
exactly what
Republicans want Donald Trump to
focus on
tonight.
Look, if you're a Republican not
involved
with the Donald Trump campaign,
you are just
hoping that what Donald Trump
does is put
the focus back on her, put her
on the defensive,
remind people about the years of
scandal,
what it would feel like to have
another Clinton
in the White House, remind them
of the '90s
and the current scandals with
Hillary Clinton
and the e-mail server, and to
help stop the
down-ballot drop.
The greatest fear that
Republicans have right
now is that Donald Trump, as his
numbers have
fallen, they're terrified they
too are going
to lose seats down-ballot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're going
to reassemble
all of you at 9:00 Eastern.
And so we will be back right
here with Mark,
David and Amy for our special
live coverage
of this final debate.
Again, that starts at 9:00
Eastern.
Plus, we will be providing
debate analysis
and fact-checking on our Web
site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And, in the meantime, you can
watch every
presidential and vice
presidential debate
since 1960 on our new Web site,
watchthedebates.org.
LLOYD BENTSEN (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Senator, you are no Jack
Kennedy.
GERALDINE FERRARO (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
I almost resent, Vice President
Bush, your
patronizing...
MITT ROMNEY (R), Presidential
Candidate: Whole
binders full of women.
MICHAEL DUKAKIS (D),
Presidential Candidate:
That I have opposed the death
penalty during
all of my life.
JOHN YANG: Interact with all the
general election
debates on our Web site,
watchthedebates.org.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We turn now to
our series
on issues shaping this election.
Tonight: What will our next
president do about
this country's justice system?
Hillary Clinton has pointed to
reducing racial
bias and overincarceration.
Here she was at the first
presidential debate
more than three weeks ago.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
It's just a fact that if you're
a young African-American
man and you do the same thing as
a young white
man, you are more likely to be
arrested, charged,
convicted, and incarcerated.
So, we've got to address the
systemic racism
in our criminal justice system.
We cannot just say law and
order.
We have to say -- we have to
come forward
with a plan that is going to
divert people
from the criminal justice
system, deal with
mandatory minimum sentences
which have put
too many people away for too
long for doing
too little.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For his part,
President
Obama has stepped up the use of
his clemency
powers in the last year.
In 2016, he's shortened some 590
sentences,
almost all of them for
nonviolent drug-related
crimes.
That's not how Donald Trump has
described
the effort.
He told an audience last weekend
that the
White House is, in his words --
quote -- "steadily
dismantling the federal criminal
justice system."
Here's more from that event in
New Hampshire.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
President Obama has commuted the
sentences
of record numbers of high-level
drug traffickers.
Can you believe this?
Many of them kingpins and
violent armed traffickers
with extensive criminal
histories and records.
Hillary Clinton promises to
continue and expand
this approach, turning our
streets back over
to gangs, drug cartels and armed
career criminals
that we're not going to get out
of our country.
And I want everything to be law
and order
and justice and everything
perfect, everything
perfect.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We dig in to
the issue of
law and order in this campaign.
Again to Lisa Desjardins.
She recorded this conversation
yesterday.
LISA DESJARDINS: To discuss all
this, we're
joined by Leah Wright Rigueur.
She's a professor at Harvard
focusing on American
history, race, civil rights and
the presidency.
And David Harris, professor of
law at the
University of Pittsburgh, he
studies police
behavior, law enforcement, and
the law more
broadly.
Welcome to you both.
DAVID HARRIS, University of
Pittsburgh: Thank
you.
LISA DESJARDINS: David, I want
to start with
criminal justice reform.
The idea generally is that
perhaps we have
too many people in prison for
too long.
Where do these two candidates
stand on criminal
justice reform?
DAVID HARRIS: Well, Mr. Trump
has not said
much about mass incarceration.
His platform of criminal justice
seems to
center on the idea of law and
order generally,
on getting tougher, in
particular using stop
and frisk and various kinds of
racial profiling.
Mrs. Clinton has a different
take on these
things.
She's very much putting on the
forefront of
her campaign the idea of getting
rid or cutting
back on mass incarceration, and
particularly
on improving the relations
between police
and the communities they serve,
particularly
people of color.
You heard her in the first
debate talking
about implicit bias.
This is one of her main planks
in her criminal
justice platform.
LISA DESJARDINS: Leah Wright
Rigueur, we heard
Donald Trump over the weekend
even say he
thinks the idea of commuting
some of these
drug sentences might be hurting
the opioid
crisis, in fact, bringing more
drug traffickers
onto the street.
Can you comment on where he is
and also the
past history of both these
candidates, Clinton
and Trump, when it comes to
crime in America?
LEAH WRIGHT RIGUEUR, Harvard
University: So,
I think the approach that Donald
Trump is
taking is, in fact, breaking
with the new
direction of the Republican
Party, which has
been to take a gentler approach
on issues
of drugs and even on mass
incarceration.
He built himself as the law and
order candidate.
But what law and order means
largely for him
is watching, is surveying,
surveillance, control.
And it's really about an
intervention of the
state on behalf of controlling
crime.
That is radical in some ways.
And he's really marking himself
as a kind
of new, souped-up Richard Nixon.
Now, the interesting thing here
is that Trump's
history really does play into
this.
The most obvious example is the
Central Park
5 case, where he called for kind
of harsh
draconian law, imposure of law
and order,
on men who were later found to
be innocent.
But what is interesting is that,
even after
they were found to be innocent
and after the
courts ruled in their favor, he
still doubled
down, and, in fact, last week
doubled down
on where he was standing,
doubled down on
his approach on how these men
should have
been treated.
The interesting thing here is
that, where
we have with somebody, a
candidate like Hillary
Clinton, who still is kind of
risk-averse
when it comes to law and order
things, where
we have seen some growth with
her, right?
We know her -- and many people
know her, are
familiar with her because of her
language
around super predators and the
mass incarceration
in the 1994 crime bill.
We have seen a willingness on
the part of
her campaign to shift in a
direction of more
progressive policies.
Not so much with Donald Trump,
who seems to
have doubled down even harder
from where he
stood many years ago.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's so
interesting.
We have two candidates that, at
different
points, have been tough on
crime, but now
they seem to be going in
different rhetoric
directions.
David Harris, I want to ask you
about one
of Donald Trump's ideas.
He says we need to increase
police power and
increase police numbers.
What do we know about what that
does, and
does that work?
DAVID HARRIS: Well, these are
two different
things, police power and police
numbers.
We know that, in a police
department, having
more officers can allow police
to serve communities
better.
But it depends very much on how
they are used,
how they are deployed and how
well they are
trained.
So, numbers by themselves don't
make a difference.
Increasing police powers, that's
a whole other
thing.
And I think we have been through
an era, from
the 1980s forward, where police
power, especially
in crime on the streets kind of
issues, police
power has been increased and
increased, and
discretion has been opened and
opened and
opened some more, to the point
that police
have very great power.
They have very great power to
stop people,
to frisk people, to make traffic
stops and
turn them into drug
investigations.
All of these things are signs of
very great
police power.
And we have reached a point
where I think
most people acknowledge that
there need to
be some limits.
LISA DESJARDINS: But, in some
cases, more
police on the street does help.
It's just how you deploy it; is
that what
you're saying?
DAVID HARRIS: Yes, very much.
I mean, you can put numbers on
the street,
and it may help, but numbers
alone never make
for success.
It's how you use the resources
you have, including,
most importantly, your human
resources, your
police officers.
If they are well-trained, they
have good communication
skills, they relate well to the
community,
you can really build something.
You can build relationships.
And that's where all good
policing starts,
with relationships with
communities.
LISA DESJARDINS: Finally, in the
short time
we have left, I want to ask you
all, this
is a daily topic for many
Americans.
But I have been amazed there has
been very
little headlines in terms of the
political
campaign about these ideas of
crime and justice.
How important are these when it
comes to the
conversation right now about
crime and justice
in America, Leah?
LEAH WRIGHT RIGUEUR: So, they're
incredibly
important.
And I think this is part of --
at least for
Donald Trump, this is part of a
larger conversation
that he is having that is
largely about control.
Right?
So, it's not just about -- he
manages to connect
this idea of law and order and
about policing
to other ideas like rigged
elections, right,
which is a very troubling --
very troubling
area that he's moved into.
I also think it's worth
considering how Hillary
Clinton thinks about and how her
campaign
has really thought about
policing inequality
injustice.
And so I mentioned before that
she's been
risk-averse in a number of
different ways.
And we have seen some of these
tensions between
social and movements political
movements that
have come off, off the ground,
but, at the
same time, I think we have seen
kind of pushing
and a willingness or an ability
to move and
shift on these important issues.
LISA DESJARDINS: All right,
David Harris of
the University of Pittsburgh and
Leah Wright
Rigueur of Harvard, thank you
both for joining
us.
LEAH WRIGHT RIGUEUR: Thanks for
having us.
DAVID HARRIS: Pleasure.
Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We know you
care about the
issues this election.
Find all of our coverage on
where the candidates
stand on various topics, from
climate change
to ISIS, on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a look at
trying to clean
up the water supply in the
country's heartland.
For decades, American farmers
have been applying
nitrogen fertilizer, in some
cases too generously,
to crops.
Much of that fertilizer has
found its way
into runoff, contaminating water
supplies
and forcing many communities to
invest heavily
in water treatment plants.
From NET in Nebraska, Ariana
Brochas of Harvest
Public Media reports on new
technologies farmers
are using to reduce
contamination from their
fields.
It's part of our series about
the Leading
Edge of science and tech.
ARIANA BROCHAS, Harvest Public
Media: When
University of Nebraska professor
Richard Ferguson
looks at a cornfield, he has no
illusions.
RICHARD FERGUSON, University of
Nebraska:
To profitably produce corn in
Nebraska, we
have to apply nitrogen
fertilizer.
In many cases, in the past, we
applied more
than we really needed.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Ferguson wants
to reduce the
chance that excess nitrogen will
get into
the groundwater.
His high-tech approach, called
Project SENSE,
uses sensor technology to help
farmers fertilize
during the growing season as
timely and precisely
as possible.
RICHARD FERGUSON: If we can make
them more
money by the use of sensor
technology, we
think that's something they
would adopt.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Project SENSE is
being put
to the test in areas where
groundwater nitrate
levels are high.
Today, it's at the Seim family
farm in Central
Nebraska.
The machine's arms have sensors
that gauge
how much nitrogen the plants
need.
A computer fires applicators to
deliver fertilizer,
practically feeding plants one
by one.
For Anthony Seim, SENSE is
another tool for
his family to try.
ANTHONY SEIM, Farmer: I don't
think there's
any farmer that wakes up in the
morning and
says, I'm just going to go dump
1,000 gallons
of fertilizer down a ditch.
Everybody's trying.
It's just that it doesn't always
work.
There's a lot of things that we
can't control,
weather being the biggest one.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Anthony and his
brothers have
adopted their father's ideology
of progressive
farming.
Like many farmers, Ken Seim used
to put nearly
all his fertilizer on the ground
before the
crops were even planted.
KEN SEIM, Farmer: Today, we
apply everything
in we call it spoon-feeding,
which is a term
for just a little bit at a time.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Noah Seim shows
off one method
of spoon-feeding.
It's called chemigation or
fertigation.
It uses a center pivot hooked up
to a fertilizer
tank.
This lets the Seims control how
much nitrogen
gets applied each time they
water.
It's less precise, but less
expensive than
Project SENSE, but still allows
farmers to
vary fertilizer rates in
response to weather,
soil moisture and plant growth.
Across the Missouri River in
Iowa, you won't
find many center pivots.
Here, they rely on good soil and
rain.
DICK SLOAN, Farmer: We got a
three-inch rain
24 hours or 48 hours ago, but
you can see
how the water didn't come down
and leave a
channel through my field.
A lot of soy conversation is
about slowing
water down.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Dick Sloan farms
in Eastern
Iowa, near Cedar Rapids.
Here, systems of underground
pipe, or tiles,
drain excess water off fields.
But those tiles also carry
fertilizer and
pesticides and drain directly
into nearby
streams and rivers.
This kind of field runoff isn't
regulated,
and Iowa has some of the worst
water pollution
in the Midwest.
Sloan uses no-till and cover
crops to help
slow and filter water before it
gets to his
tiles.
DICK SLOAN: You can see how
everything's kind
of knitted together.
ARIANA BROCHAS: He also devotes
some of his
land to prairie strips, land
that could be
used to grow corn or soybeans.
DICK SLOAN: As water moves down
across the
field, it encounters this
contoured strip
that will stop any residue from
getting through
there and have less water
getting polluted
as it goes down to the Cedar
River then on
down to the Mississippi and down
to the Gulf.
So that's the hope.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Former Iowa
extension agent
Chad Ingels has worked with
farmers like Dick
Sloan on field practices to
improve water
quality in Northeast Iowa.
One new tool is something you
can't see.
It's called a bioreactor.
CHAD INGELS, Former Iowa
Extension Agent:
The water from this field would
normally dump
right out into this ditch behind
us.
But we have it go through this
structure.
And there's a set of gates on
the inside that
diverts it in the bioreactor
that is underneath
this grassy area.
And the bioreactor is just a
trench that is
100-feet-long and 30-feet-wide
and it is filled
with wood chips.
ARIANA BROCHAS: As the
nitrate-laden water
passes through the wood chips,
microbes turn
the nitrates into harmless
nitrogen gas, which
makes up most of our atmosphere.
CHAD INGELS: I think almost
every field needs
some kind of practice, whether
it's a bioreactor,
no-till, just better nitrogen
and phosphorus
management.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Craig Cox with
the Environmental
Working Group in Ames, Iowa,
agrees that every
field needs some sort of
management.
But he says voluntary measures
don't work.
CRAIG COX, Environmental Working
Group: Otherwise,
the water would be in a lot
better shape than
it is.
ARIANA BROCHAS: In the last
decade, the federal
government has spent more than
$3 billion
to support measures that reduce
water pollution
from Iowa farms.
The Environmental Working Group
monitored
the use of two conservation
practices over
a five-year period and found the
net gain
was negligible.
CRAIG COX: Here's the good news
story.
We got a new buffer.
But here's the bad news story,
right?
We had a buffer, and now we
don't have one
anymore.
ARIANA BROCHAS: Cox says some
standard conservation
practices should be required of
all farmers,
but Dick Sloan says his field
practices can't
be mandated on his neighbors.
DICK SLOAN: People have a
natural negative
reaction to regulation.
Anybody would.
It's not just -- farmers are
just so much
like everybody else.
It's going to take time for them
to question
what they're doing.
KEN SEIM: Farmers are very
independent, but
the reality is, if we won't be
stewards ourselves,
someone will have to help us be
a steward.
CRAIG COX: This is a solvable
problem.
It's just everyone has to do
their part.
KEN SEIM: One thing I always
tell people when
I work with them, if you can
make me better
at what I'm doing, I'm in.
ARIANA BROCHAS: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Ariana Brochas in Lincoln,
Nebraska.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for now.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
We will see you online and right
back here
at 9:00 p.m. Eastern for our
special live
debate coverage.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.